New website and Neutrino 2020
=============================

.. feed-entry::
   :date: 2020-06-29 21:55
   :author: Steven Gardiner

After several years of existence as an uninviting landing page for MARLEY's
`Doxygen <https://www.doxygen.nl/index.html>`__-based API documentation, the
`marleygen.org <http://www.marleygen.org>`__ website has now been completely
revamped.

.. cut::

Fans of the old site can still find an updated version of the API
documentation `here <../doxygen/index.html>`__.

Today marks the beginning of the second week of the biannual `Neutrino
<https://conferences.fnal.gov/nu2020>`__ conference. Due to the ongoing
COVID-19 pandemic, the conference is being held completely online this year.
Slides and video recordings of the plenary talks are available on the
conference agenda `webpage
<https://indico.fnal.gov/event/43209/timetable/#20200622.detailed>`__.

Many scientific `posters <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/>`__
on a wide variety of topics have also been prepared for Neutrino 2020. These
are being presented via a combination of downloadable PDF files, two-minute
video explanations, and live conversations with the poster authors using a
`customized version <https://nu2020-hubs.org/cloud>`__ of the `Mozilla Hubs
<https://hubs.mozilla.com>`__ virtual reality plaform.

Although my own Neutrino 2020 poster (`#549
<https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=549>`__) is not
related to MARLEY, the code is nevertheless having quite a showing at the
conference. I've counted eight posters so far that include results calculated
using MARLEY:

.. |I-127| raw:: html

   <sup>127</sup>I

* Avinay Bhat for MicroBooNE, "MeV-scale physics in MicroBooNE,"
  poster `#4 <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=4>`__

* Peibo An for COHERENT, "A machine learning approach to study the neutrino
  charged-current interaction on |I-127|," poster `#13
  <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=13>`__

* Ivan Lepetic *et al*., "Seeing the invisible: benefits and capabilities of
  MeV-scale reconstruction in single-phase LArTPCs," poster
  `#88 <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=88>`__

* Erin Conley for DUNE, "Using boosted decision trees to identify supernova
  neutrino interactions in DUNE," poster
  `#307 <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=307>`__

* Samuel Hedges for COHERENT, "Electron neutrino charged-current interactions
  on I-127 in the COHERENT NaIvE detector," poster
  `#420 <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=420>`__

* Jacob Daughhetee for COHERENT, “Neutrino-induced neutron detectors at the
  Spallation Neutron Source,” poster `#428
  <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=428>`__

* Biswaranjan Behera for DUNE, "Detecting supernova neutrinos using the DUNE
  photon detection system," poster `#474
  <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=474>`__

* Diane Markoff for COHERENT, "A ton-scale NaI detector for neutrino-nucleus
  scattering measurements," poster `#554
  <https://nusoft.fnal.gov/nova/nu2020postersession/?posterID=554>`__

It has been great to see all of the exciting work being done by MARLEY users.
If I've missed your MARLEY-related poster, please send me an `email
<mailto:gardiner@fnal.gov>`__ about it!

A final tag for MARLEY v1.2.0 and an associated paper on the `arXiv
<https://arxiv.org>`__ are both just around the corner. Stay tuned and happy
remainder of Neutrino 2020!
